- Mark Guido, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Hi, hello.
- It's fantastic to have you here.
I'm so excited about all the things
that are happening around Python performance.
I feel like there's just a bunch of new ideas springing up
and people working on it and yeah, it's exciting times.
- Definitely.
- Yeah, and you two are of course,
right at the center of it.
But before we talk about the performance work
that you are all doing,
as well as some of the other initiatives going along,
maybe in parallel there,
let's just get started with a little bit of background.
Guido, you've been on the show before,
you're a creator of Python,
you hardly need an introduction to most people out there.
But you have recently made a couple of big changes
in your life, I thought I'd just ask you how that's going.
You retired and we were all super happy for you on that.
And then you said, you know what,
I kind of want to play with code some more.
And now you're at Microsoft.
What's the story there?
- Oh, I just liked the idea of retiring.
So I tried to see how many times in a lifetime I can retire.
Starting with my retirement from BDFL,
which didn't stop me from staying super active
in the community.
But when I retired from Dropbox a little over two years ago,
I really thought that that was it, that I believed it.
- Yeah.
- And everybody else believed it too.
Dropbox certainly believed it.
They were very sad to see me go.
I was sad to go, but I thought there was time.
And I sort of, I had a few great months decompressing,
going on bike rides with my wife and family, fun stuff.
And then the pandemic hit.
- Yeah.
- And a bunch of things got harder.
The fortunately the bike rides eventually got restored
but other activities like eating out
was a lot more stressful.
Basically just life was a lot more stressful in general.
- Right, and human interaction
was definitely strunken down to a kernel.
Yeah, and I somehow I thought, well, I want to have something to do. I want to
do more sort of software development in the team.
And the Python core development team didn't really cut it for me because it's
sort of diffuse and volunteer-based and sometimes you get stuck waiting for months for the steering
council to sort of approve of or reject a certain idea that you've worked on.
So I asked around and I found that Microsoft was super interested in hiring me
and that was now, well tomorrow exactly a month, a year, tomorrow a year ago
I started at Microsoft. In the beginning I just had to find my way around at Microsoft.
Eventually I figured I should pick a project and after looking around and realizing I
couldn't really turn the world of machine learning upside down. I figured I'd
stay closer to home and see if Microsoft was interested in funding a team working on
speeding up CPython. And I was actually inspired by Mark's proposals that were going around at the
time. So I convinced Microsoft to sort of start a small team and get Mark on board.
Yeah, that's fantastic. I also feel a little bit like machine learning is amazing, but I don't have
a lot of experience with it. And whenever I work with it, I always kind of feel on the outside of
it. But this core performance of Python, that helps everybody, right? Including even Microsoft,
right? It maybe saves them energy on Azure when they're running Python workloads or whatever.
So you're enjoying your time, you happy you're there?
I'm very happy.
Yeah, a lot of freedom to basically pursue what you are, right?
And it's nice that the new Microsoft is very open source friendly.
At least in many cases, obviously not everywhere.
But sort of our department is very open source friendly.
Things like Visual Studio Code are all open source.
And so there was great support with management for sort of the way I said I wanted to do this project,
which is completely out in the open.
Everything we do is sort of just merged into main as soon as we can.
We work with the core developers.
we don't have like a private fork of Python
where we do amazing stuff.
And then we knock on the steering council's door
and say, "Hey, we'd like to merge this."
- Yeah, you're not gonna drop six months of work
just in one block, right?
It's there for everyone to see.
- Exactly.
- I think that's really, really positive.
And wow, what a change, not just from Microsoft,
but so many companies to work that way
compared to 10, 15 years ago.
Yeah, absolutely.
Now, before I get to Mark, I just wanna,
you know, a bunch of people are excited that you're here.
And Luis out in the audience said,
"Wow, it's Guido, I can't thank you enough
"for your amazing Python and all the community."
Awesome.
- Great to hear.
- Yeah.
Mark, how about you?
How'd you get into this Python performance thing?
I know you did some stuff with HotPie back in the day.
- Yeah, that was sort of my PhD work.
So I guess I kind of got into the performance
almost before the Python.
So I was doing sort of compiler work, masters,
and obviously just, you know,
you need to write scripts and just get stuff done.
And, you know, often just Python is just a language
to get stuff done.
And then it's that, I think I'm in Rigo,
sort of, I think one of his sort of credits
in one of his papers or something,
he says, "Thank you for Python
"for being such a great language to use
"and such a challenge to optimize."
So it's doubly good if you're coming at it from a sort of,
so it provides this great intellectual challenge
when you're actually trying to optimize it.
And it's a really nice language to use as well.
So it's doubly good.
- It is doubly good, it's doubly good.
Yeah, and before we move on really quick,
Paul Everett says, "It's really impressive
of how the in the open work has been done.
Yeah, totally agree.
- Hi, Paul.
- Yeah, keep that going.
Hey, Paul, happy to see you here.
Now, we're gonna talk about making Python faster,
but I wanna start this conversation
with a bit of a hypothetical question,
but sort of set the stage and ask,
how much does Python really need to be faster?
Because on one hand,
Sure, there's a lot more performance we can do
if you're going to say, well, we're going to solve the nbody
problem using C++ or C# versus Python.
It's going to be faster with the native value types and whatnot.
On the other, people are building amazing software
that runs really fast with Python already.
We've got the C optimizations for things like NumPy
and SQL alchemies, transformation layer,
serialization layer, and so on.
So a lot of times that kind of brings it back
to C performance.
So how much do you think Python really needs
to be optimized already?
Not that more is always better, faster is always better,
but I just kind of want to set the stage
and get your two thoughts on that.
- Well, I always think back to my experience at Dropbox,
where there was a large server called the meta server,
which did sort of almost all the server side work, like anything that hits www.dropbox.com hits that server.
And that server was initially a small prototype written in Python. The client was actually also a small prototype written in Python.
And to this day, both the server and the client at Dropbox, as far as I know,
unless in the last two years, they totally ripped it apart, but I don't think they did.
They tweaked it, but it's still all now very large Python applications.
And so Dropbox really sort of feels the speed of Python
in its budget because they have thousands,
I don't know how many thousands of machines
that all run this enormous Python application.
And yes-
- If it was four times faster,
that's not just for a quarter of the machines,
that's less DevOps, less admin, all sorts of stuff, right?
- Oh, even if it was 4% faster, they would notice.
- Yeah.
The other area where I think it's really relevant
has to do with the multi-core side of things, right?
I have a PC over there, 16 cores.
My new laptop has 10 cores.
Although with Python, it's hard to take true advantage
of that side of modern CPU performance
if it's not IO bound, right?
- Yeah, so the, I don't know how deep you want me
go into that and Mark can stop me if I'm going too deep too. But there are existing patterns
that work reasonably well if you have a server application that sort of handles multiple
fairly independent requests. Like if you're building a multi-core web application
you can use multi-processing or pre-forking or a variety of ways of running a Python
interpreter on each core that you have, each independently handling requests.
And you can do that if you have 64 cores, you run 64 Python processes.
Right, that's just a number in a micro-WSGI config file. It's nothing.
Yeah, but it works for applications that are designed to handle
multiple independent requests in a scalable fashion. There are other algorithms that
you would want to execute where it's much more complicated to employ all your cores efficiently.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's still a nut that Python hasn't cracked.
And I'm assuming you're asking this question because Sam Gross, a very smart developer at Facebook, claims that he has cracked it.
Yeah, and perhaps he has. It's an interesting idea. We'll dive into that a little bit later.
I'm more asking it just because I see a lot of people say that Python is too slow.
And then I also see a lot of people being very successful with it.
And it not being slow in practice, or not being much slower than other things.
And so I more want to set the stage of like the context matters, right?
This Dropbox example you have, it really matters to them.
You know, my course website where people take courses,
the response time of the pages is 40 milliseconds.
If it was 38, it doesn't matter.
It's really fast, it's fine.
So I think, but if I was trying to do computational biology
in Python, I would really want to be able to take advantage
of those 16 cores, right?
So there's just such a variety of perspectives
where it matters.
Mark, what are your thoughts on all this?
- Well, it's just a case of saving energy, saving time.
Just, it just makes the whole thing nicer to use.
So I mean, there's a lot of just if development in data science and it's that responsiveness,
the whole, you know, just breaking your train of thought because things take too long versus
just keeping in the flow and all this sort of stuff.
It's just nice to have something that's faster.
I mean, it's not just the big companies saving money as well.
I mean, it's just keeps everyone's server budgets down.
I mean, if you just need a smaller virtual instance because you can serve the requests
up fast enough because Python's faster. So I think it's just generally a sort of responsible
thing to do. I mean, it's also just, you know, people expect technology to move forwards
and there's this feeling of, you know, falling behind or not, you know, people wanting to
move other languages because of the perceived performance.
Right. I do think that that's an issue, you know, I'm moving to Go because it has better
or async support, or we're rewriting this in Rust
for whatever reason.
Sometimes that might make sense, but other times
I feel like that's just a shame, and it could be used better.
A couple of questions from the audience
I just want to throw out there.
Let's see.
One was, Guido, especially, you must
be really proud to hear about the Mars
helicopter and the lander and Python in space,
how did you feel when you heard about the helicopter
using Python and the lander using Python and Flask
and things like that?
- It wasn't really a surprise given how popular Python is
amongst scientists.
So I didn't throw a party but it made me feel good. I mean it's definitely
sort of one of those accomplishments for a piece of technology if it's actually shot into space.
You know you've made a difference. I remember like 30 years ago or more when I
helped some coding on a European project called Amoeba, which was like a little distributed
operating system. And one of the things that they always boasted was that
our software runs on the European Space Station. And that's very important.
Yeah, so yeah, I totally get the feeling and I hope that everyone who contributed to Python
also sort of feels that their contribution has.
- That sense of awe, if you look up in the night sky
and you see that little, that bright star
that's actually Mars and you think, yeah, it's up there.
Yeah, fantastic.
All right, let's dive into some of the performance stuff
that you all have been doing.
So maybe Guido, start us out with the team.
So you've got a group of folks working together.
It's not just you and also now Mark Shannon
is working with you as well, right?
- That's correct.
The sort of in March or so,
the initial team was Eric Snow, Mark and myself.
And since I think, since early October,
we've got a fourth team member, Brent Booker,
who is also a Python core dev,
since I think since about a year and a half.
He's a really smart guy.
So now we have four people,
except you should really discount me as a team member
because I spend most of my time in meetings
either with a team or with other things
going on at Microsoft in practice.
- Sure, how closely do you work with say
the VS Code Python plugin team and other parts,
or is this more a focused effort?
- This is more focused.
I know those people.
I've not met anyone in person, of course.
I've not met, I've not been to a Microsoft office
since I started there, which is really crazy.
But what we're doing is really quite separate
from other Python-related projects at Microsoft.
But I do get called into meetings to give my opinion
or what I know about how the community is feeling
or how the core dev team is feeling
about various things that are interesting to Microsoft
or sometimes things that management is concerned about.
- Yeah, excellent.
It might be worth saying this, not just Microsoft as well.
We've got contributors from,
there's quite a few other core developers are helping out.
So it's a broader effort.
- Yeah, fantastic.
And Mark, what's your role on the team?
- I don't really have sort of official roles,
but I guess I'm sort of doing as a fair bit
of sort of technical sort of architectural side of stuff,
obviously, 'cause this is like my field, so.
- Right.
- But I think-- - You're a nice grand chief.
- Yeah, I guess so.
- All right, Guido, you gave a talk
at the Python Language Summit in May this year,
talking about FasterPython, this team,
some of the work that you're doing.
So I thought that might be a good place
to start the conversation.
- Yeah, some of the content there is a little outdated, but.
- Well, you just have to let me know
when things have changed, so.
One of the questions you ask is, can we make CPython specifically faster?
And I think that's also worth pointing out, right?
There's many runtimes.
Often they're called interpreters.
I prefer to the runtime word because sometimes they compile and they don't interpret.
So anyway, there's...
Sometimes they're called virtual machines.
Yeah, there's many Python virtual machines.
PyPy, CPython, you know, traditionally there's been Jython and IronPython,
although I don't know if they're doing anything.
But your focus and your energy is about
how do we make the Python people get,
if they just go to their terminal and type Python,
the main Python faster,
'cause that's what people are using, right?
For the most part?
- Yeah, that sort of,
I don't have specific numbers or sources,
but I believe that like between 95 and 99%
of people using Python are using some version of CPython,
hopefully not too many of them are still using Python 2.
- Yeah, I would totally agree with that.
And I would think it would trend more towards the 99
and less towards the 95 for sure.
Maybe a fork of CPython that they've done
something weird too, but yeah, I would say CPython.
So you asked the question, can we speed up CPython?
And Teddy out in the live stream,
I don't know if I'll be able to catch his comment exactly.
Yeah, there he is.
You know, what will we lose in making Python faster
if anything, for example, what are the trade-offs?
So you point out, well, can we make it two times faster,
10 times faster, and then without breaking anybody's code?
Right, because I think we just went through a two to three
type of thing that was way more drawn out
than I feel like it should have been.
We don't want to reset that again, do we?
- No, well, obviously the numbers on this slide
are just teasers.
- Of course.
- I don't know how to do it.
I think Mark has a plan, but that doesn't necessarily mean he knows how to do it exactly either.
The key thing is, and sort of to answer your audience question, without breaking on anybody's code.
So we're really trying to sort of not have there be any downsides to adopting this new version of Python,
which is unusual because definitely if you use PiPi, which is I think the only sort of competitor that
competes on speed that is still alive, and in some use, you pay in terms of how well does it work
with extension modules. It doesn't work with all extension modules and with some extension modules
it works but it's slower. There are various limitations and that in particular is something
that has kept many similar attempts back. If we just give this up we can have x y and z right but
those turn out to be pretty big compromises.
Absolutely, and sometimes, I mean quite often extension modules are the issue. Sometimes there are also things where
Python's runtime semantics are not fully specified.
It's not defined by the language
when exactly objects are finalized when they go out of scope.
In practice, there's a lot of code around there that in very subtle ways depends on CPython's
finalization semantics based on reference counting. And so anything, and this is also
something that PyPy learned, and I think, oh, Piston, which is definitely alive and open source.
You should talk to the Piston guys if you haven't already.
But their first version, which they developed many years ago with Dropbox,
suffered from sort of imprecise finalization semantics.
And they found with sort of early tests on the Dropbox server code that there was too much
behavior that sort of didn't work right because objects weren't always finalized at the same time
or sometimes in the same order as they were in standard CPython. Oh, interesting.
There's no promises about that, right? It just says, well, when you're done with it, it goes away
pretty much eventually. If it's a reference count, it might go away quickly. If it's
a cycle it might go way slower. That's correct and unfortunately this is one of those
sort of unspecified parts of the language where people in practice all depend on
this or not everybody obviously but many large production code bases do
end up depending on that. Not sort of intentionally, it's not that a bunch of
application architects got together and said,
"We're going to depend on precise finalization based on reference counting."
It's more that those servers, like the 5 million lines of server code that Dropbox had when I left,
were written by hundreds of different engineers, some of whom
wrote only one function or two lines of code, some of whom sort of
maintained several entire subsystems for years but sort of collectively it's a very large number
of people who don't all have the same understanding of how Python works and which part is part of the
sort of the promises of the language and which is just sort of how the implementation happens to
work and right some of those are pretty obvious I mean there are some sometimes there are
functions where the documentation says, well, if you sort of, you can use this, but it's not
guaranteed that this function exists or that it always behaves the same way. But the sort of
the finalization behavior is pretty implicit. Yeah, Mark, what are your thoughts here?
Well, I mean, there's people just expectations is derived from what they use. The trouble with
The problem with documentation is like instructions,
they don't always get read.
And also it's not just finalizations,
it's also reclaiming memory.
So anything that has different memory management system
might just need more memory.
Reference counting is pretty good
at reclaiming memory quickly
and will run near the limit of what you have available.
Whereas a sort of more tracing garbage collector like PyPy
doesn't always work so well like that.
I mean, one thing we are gonna change
is the performance characteristics.
Now that should generally be a good thing,
but there may be people who rely
on more consistent performance.
- You may end up unearthing race conditions,
potentially that no one really knew was there.
I mean, but I would not blame you for making Python faster
and people who write bad, poorly thread-safe code
fall into some trap there.
But I guess that, you know,
There's even those kinds of unintended consequences, I guess.
That one sounds like pretty low risk, to be honest.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, also the warm-up time.
We'll get a warm-up time.
Now, what will happen is, of course, it's just getting faster,
so it's no slower to start with, but it still has the perception
that it now takes a while to get up to speed, whereas previously
it used to get up to speed very quickly because it didn't really get up to speed.
but it stayed the same speed.
But these are subtle things, but they're detectable changes that people may notice.
There are also, like any optimizer,
there are certain situations where the optimization doesn't really work.
It's not necessarily a pessimization, but somehow it's not any faster than previous versions.
while other similar code may run much faster.
And so you have this strange effect that
you make a small tweak to your code,
which you think should not affect performance at all.
Or you're not sort of aware that suddenly you've made
that part of your code 20% slower.
- Yeah.
- It's just gonna be so different.
- It is one of our design goals
not to have these surprising sort of performance edges,
but yeah, there's a lot of cases
where it will definitely make a difference
and things will get a bit slower.
- Yeah, there are very subtle things
that can have huge performance differences
that I think people who are newer to Python run into,
like, oh, I see you can do this comprehension.
And I had square brackets, but I saw they had parentheses.
So that's the same thing, right?
Well, not so much, not so much.
Not if it's a million lines of code
or a million lines of data.
All right, so I think, yeah,
that's a great way to think about it.
Not making it break a lot of code is,
I think, as much as it's exciting to think
about completely reinventing it,
it's super important that we just have a lot of consistency
now that we've kind of just moved beyond
the Python two versus three type of thing.
I think also it's worth mentioning, Guido, you gave a shout out to Sam Gross's proposal.
The stuff you're doing is not Sam Gross's proposal.
It's not about, even from what I can see from the outside, that much about threading.
It's more about how do I make just the fundamental stuff of Python go faster. Is that right?
That's right. These are like completely sort of different developments.
When we started this, we didn't actually know Sam or that there was anyone who was working
on something like that.
But there had been previous attempts to remove the gill, which is what Sam has done.
And the most recent one of those was by Larry Hastings, who came up with a great name, the
Galectomy.
That's a fantastic name, yeah.
a lot of time in it, but in the end I think he had to give up because the baseline performance
was just significantly slower than Vanilla Interpreter. And I believe it also didn't
scale all that well, although I don't remember whether it sort of stopped scaling at 5 or 10
or 20 cores. But right, yeah, claims that he's sort of got the baseline performance, I think,
within 10% or so often a lot three dot nine, which is what he's worked off. Right. And he also claims
that he has a very scalable solution. And he obviously put much more effort in it,
much more time in it than Larry ever had. Yeah, it sounds like Facebook is putting some effort into
funding his work on that, which is great. Yeah, but but I it feels like a very sort of
bottom up project. It feels like Yeah. Sam thought that that this was an interesting challenge. And
he sort of convinced himself that he could do it and he sort of gradually worked on all the
different problems that he encountered on the way and he convinced his manager that this was a good
use of his time. It's my theory because that's usually how these projects go but you always
never have management say oh we gotta fund an engineer to make faster or make a multi-core
or whatever, find a good engineer.
- It's probably like that Dropbox story you told.
We have all these servers, there's a lot to maintain.
Hey, what if we could have fewer of them?
What if we could do better?
That's something a manager that could totally get behind.
All right, so you all are adopting what I see
as going as the Shannon plan, as in Mark Shannon,
the guest in the top left here.
That's fantastic.
I remember talking about this as well,
that you had posted this thing,
when was this back?
A little over a year ago,
so interesting time in there, right?
You had talked about making Python faster
over the next four releases by a factor of five,
which is pretty awesome.
And you have a concrete plan to sort of
make changes along each yearly release
to add a little bit of performance
because of geometric growth,
make it quite a bit faster over time.
[silence]
Yeah. So, do you want me to run through these?
Yeah, yeah. Tell us about your plan.
You've got four stages, and maybe we could talk through each stage
and focus on some of the tech there.
The way we're implementing it is now
kind of a bit of a jumble of stage one and two.
But the basic idea is that
dynamic languages, the key performance improvement
is always based on specialization.
obviously, most of the time the code does mostly the same thing as it did last time. And even in
non-loopy code, a web server, there's still a big loop level, a request response level.
So you're still hitting the same code, and those codes are doing much the same thing. And the idea
is that you multiply the code so it works for those particular cases, so you should specialize
it. So the obvious sort of simple stuff is, you know, like binary arithmetic and you have
a special version of adding integers and a special version for floats. Obviously Python
is much more special versions for different calling, different things and different attributes
and all this sort of stuff. And that's the sort of the key first stage. I mean, that's
mixed in with the second stage, which is really much more to just doing lots and lots of little
bits and tweaks and memory layout. So that's to do better memory layout. You know, modern CPUs
are, you know, extremely efficient, but they still have to fetch from, you know, speed light issues
with fetching stuff from memory. So, you know, how things are laid out in memory is key performance.
And it's sort of just those sort of little bits and tweaks here and just kind of writing the code
as we would have if it had been written for speed in the first place. So a lot of those, you know,
you know, CPython is old and it's just sort of evolved.
And a lot of it has, there's lots of potential
for just sort of rearranging data structures
and rearranging the code and so on.
And these all add up, you know, a few percent here,
a few percent there.
And it doesn't take many of those to get a decent speed up.
So that's the sort of first two stages.
And as those ones where we have some pretty concrete idea
of what we're doing.
- Right, and this is the kind of stuff
that will benefit everybody, right?
We all use numbers.
We all do comparisons, we all do addition,
call functions and so on.
- Yeah, I mean, the way we're sort of trending
with performance in the moment is that sort of,
you know, sort of webby type code,
but web backend sort of code,
you'd be looking at kind of where we are now,
I'd know it's a 25, 30% speed up.
Whereas if it's a machine learning,
a sort of numerical code,
it's more likely to be sort of 10% region.
Obviously we'd hope to push both up,
and, but we're more, I don't think we're particularly
focused on either, it's just often the case of where,
you know, the next sort of obvious
sort of convenient speed up lies.
And although everyone talks about speed ups
and I've been doing the same myself,
I mean, it's best to think of really
at the time something takes to execute.
So it's often to shaving off 1% of the time
rather than speeding up by 1%.
And because, obviously, as the overall runtime shrinks,
what were marginal improvements become more valuable.
Shaving off 0.2% might be not worth it now,
but once you sped something up by a factor of three or four,
then that suddenly becomes a percent
and it's worth the effort sort of thing.
- Right, absolutely.
Once addition becomes that much faster,
then it makes a big knock on effect.
- Yeah, which leads on to stages three and four.
So, just-in-time compilation has always hailed
as the way to speed up interpreted languages.
- Now, before you move on,
let me just sort of list out what you have on stage two
for people who haven't dove into this,
because I think some of the concrete details,
people hear this in the abstract,
they kind of want to know,
okay, well, what actually are some of the things
you all are considering?
So, improved performance for integers
less than one machine word.
It's been a long time since I've done C++.
Is a word two bytes, how big is a word?
- Well, word is how big depends on the machine.
So that'd be 64 bits for pretty much anything now.
Apart from like a little tiny embedded systems,
which is 32 still.
- So that's a lot of numbers, right?
That's many of the numbers you work with
are less than 2 billion or whatever that is.
- Yeah, basically there are two types of integers.
There's the big ones that are used for cryptography
and other such things,
where it's a number in a sort of mathematical sense,
but it's really sort of some elaborate code.
And then there's numbers that actually represent
the number of things or the number of times
you're going to do something.
And those are all relatively tiny and they'll all fit.
So, but the long ones used for cryptography
and so on are relatively rare and they're quite expensive.
So it's the other ones we want to optimize for
because when you see an integer,
that's the integers you get.
They aren't in the quadrillion range,
they're in the thousands.
- Right, right, exactly.
a loop index or an array index or something.
Some languages, one that I'm thinking of
that also maybe is kind of close to where Guido is right now
also in Microsoft space is C#,
which treats integers sometimes as value types
and sometimes as reference types.
So that when you're doing like loops and other stuff,
they operate more like C++ numbers
less like pi, you know, pointers to pi long objects.
Have you considered any of that kind of stuff?
Is that what you're thinking?
- Yeah, well, an obvious thing,
an old thing as well, is to have tagged integers.
So basically, you know,
where we would normally have a pointer,
we've got a whole bunch of zeros at the end.
64 bits, a machine is three,
and then for alignment,
there's effectively four zeros at the end.
So we're using a sixteenth of the possible numbers that a pointer could hold, four pointers,
which means leaves a bunch of integers and floating point numbers. So there's a number of
what's called tagging schemes. For example, LuaJIT, which is a very fast implementation of Lua, uses
what's called NAND boxing, which is everything's a floating point number, but there is sufficiently
something like two to the 53, which is a huge number of not a numbers in the floating point
range so you could use a lot of those for integers or
pointers. Now that's a little problematic with 64-bit pointers because obviously
64 bits is bigger than 53. But there are other schemes where you
so again a simple scheme is that basically the
least significant bit is one for pointers and zero for integers or vice
versa. And that basically just gives you
full machine performance for integers because
there's just basically anything up to 63 bits fits in a 64-bit integer and that's basically all of
your numbers. And because it's shifted across all the machine arithmetic works as normal and
overflows, you just overflow checks a machine, a single machine instruction and things like this.
And that's again pretty standard in any sort of like fast Lisp implementation
and older small talk and other sort of historical languages.
JavaScript tends to use things like this NAND boxing
I was talking about because all of the numbers
are floating point numbers.
- Right.
So another one that stands out here
is zero overhead exception handling.
Guido, that's making it into 3.11 already, right?
- Mark, didn't that?
- Yes, yeah, that is.
So that's basically just what we used to have
is we'd have a little setup and sort of tear down
except instruction for every time we wanted
to sort of controlled block of code inside a try,
as you try finally, but also with statements.
But we've ditched those in favor of just a table lookup.
So if there's an exception now,
it's just looked up in a table,
which is what the JVM Java virtual machine does.
- Yeah, excellent.
Zero overhead is a slightly optimistic term. It's obviously not zero overhead, but it is less
You'll have a harder time finding it in the profiler. There's a little bit of memory
that you didn't have before
that's a lookup table, but
it really is zero overhead if no exceptions happen, right?
Not quite
Just because there is extra memories that causes other things but also
In all because of like tracing guarantees,
sometimes we have to insert a NOP where the try was.
So there's still some slight overhead.
Then potentially in future when we compile code,
that should effectively become zero though.
But it's definitely reduced.
- Mark, Apple surprised the world
and they took their phone chips
and turned them into desktop chips.
And that seemed to actually work pretty well
with their ARM stuff.
Does the switch, not just having basically just x86 and 64-bit stuff to think about,
but now you also have this ARM stuff, does that make life harder or easier?
Does it open up possibilities or is it another thing to deal with?
It's just harder because it's...
But I mean, we were never excluding those anyway.
So, and we may want to look to the future of sort of RISC-V and, you know, it's...
So currently CPython is portable. That's a key thing. Portability is,
you know, it rather depends on testing. It's all very well saying it's perfectly portable, but
if you have never tested on a platform, you may have surprises. But it's all written in C,
and portability is a sort of serious consideration. So, I mean, things like those tagging I was just
talking about, that's technically not portable C, but it's technically, I mean, a lot of things
aren't technically portable C, but in effect are. I mean, technically it's impossible to write a
memory allocator in C because the specification says once you've called free you can't access
the memory, which makes it kind of difficult to write something that handles the memory.
But you know, these are oddities, but in practice, you know, if you write sensible C code,
it you should expect to be portable. So we are kind of basing around that. I mean, like some other
virtual machines, particularly the JavaScript ones, are effectively written,
their interpreters are often written in Assembler or some variant of it.
There's definitely a performance advantage in that, but I'm not convinced it's great enough
to lose the portability and the maintenance overhead.
Yeah, and one of the things that you focused on, Guido, was that you wanted this to be,
to keep, one of the constraints is you said you want to keep the code maintainable,
Right? This is important. Why does that matter so much rather than if we can get 20% speed up if Mark
refreshes his assembly language skills? Well, it would leave most of the core development team
behind. And so suddenly, Mark would be very, very valuable contributor because he's the only one who
understands that assembly code that's just how it goes.
Yeah.
And I don't think that that would be healthy for the Python ecosystem.
If the technology we used was so hard to understand and so hard to learn,
making it so hard to maintain,
then as an open source project we would lose velocity.
The only thing that that would cause to happen in the core team might be people decide
to move more code to Python code because now the interpreter is faster anyway so they can
sort of they don't have to write so much in C code, but then of course, likely it's actually
going to be slower, at least that's that particular bit of code. That's an interesting intention to
think about if you could make the interpreter dramatically faster, you could actually do more
Python and less C. I don't know, it would have to be there's some big number where that happens,
right? It's not just a 10%, but maybe.
That could be in the distant future, but nevertheless, I wouldn't want the C code
to be unreadable for most of the core developers.
Yeah, I agree. That makes a lot of sense.
So, being a C expert is not a requirement for being a core developer. In practice,
quite a few of the core developers are really good C coders and we sort of we support each
other in that we have we sort of we take pride in it and we help each other out. I mean code
reviews are incredibly important and we will happily help newbies to sort of get up to speed
with C. But if we if we had a considerable portion that was written in Assembler
And then it would have to be written in sort of multiple assemblers,
or there would also have to be a C version for platforms where we don't even have
access to the assembler or nobody has bothered to write that assembler code yet.
All these things make things even more complicated than they already are.
Right, and the portability and the approachability of it is certainly a huge benefit.
Two other constraints that you had here, maybe you could just elaborate on real quick, is don't break stable ABI compatibility and don't break limited API compatibility.
Yeah, so the ABI, the stable ABI is the application binary interface, and that guarantees that extension modules that use a limited set of CAPI functions
don't have to be recompiled for each new Python version.
And so you can in theory have a wheel containing binary code
and that binary code it will still be platform specific
but it won't be Python version specific.
Right. Okay. Yeah, that's very nice.
That's sort of that we don't want to break that.
It is a terrible constraint because it means we can't move
fields like the reference count or the type field around in the object.
And many, many other things as well. But it nevertheless, it is an important property because
people depend on that. Sure. And the API compatibility. Well, that's pretty clear.
You don't want people to have to rewrite. Yeah, the limited API is also the limited API is sort of
the compile time version of the stable ABI. I think it's the same set of functions,
except the stable ABI actually means that you don't have to recompile. The limited API
offers the same and I think a slightly larger set of API functions, where if you do recompile,
you're guaranteed to get the same behavior. And again, our API is pretty large
and a few things have snuck into the limited API and the stable ABI that are
actually difficult to maintain and that are
difficult to support with changes that we want to make. And so sometimes this holds us back,
but at the same time we don't want to break the promises that were made to the Python community
about API compatibility. We don't want to say, "Oh sorry folks, we made everything 20% faster,
but alas you're going to have to use a new API and all your extensions. Just recompiling isn't
going to be good enough, some functions suddenly have three arguments instead of two, or no longer
exists, or return memory that you own instead of returning a borrowed reference. And we don't want
to do any of those things because that just would break the entire ecosystem in a way that
would be as bad as the Python 3 transition. Right, and it's just not worth it.
- All right, let's go back to the Shannon plan.
So we talked about stage one and stage two.
Mark, I see here, this is Python 3.10 and Python 3.11.
Is that, are those the numbers
where they're actually gonna make it in?
Or is it, do we have to do like a plus plus or plus equal?
- I think a plus one would be appropriate.
- All right, plus equals one.
- Yeah, so, I mean, maybe we're a bit faster
because obviously I envisioned this was basically me
and one other developer,
plus maybe sort of some sort of reasonable buy-in
from the wider core development team.
So it wasn't sort of doing the work
sort of entirely in isolation or,
but yeah, it was still having extra hands
will definitely help things.
- Sure.
So back when you were thinking,
this was written at the 3.9 timeframe, right?
and you're like, okay, well, the next version,
maybe we can do this, the version after that.
And by the time it really got going,
it's more like 3.11, 3.12 and so on, right?
- Yeah, it's just around the time,
I think we switched from 3.9 to 3.10 development,
I think I was sort of thinking this joke.
- Okay, so stage three out of the four stages you have
is I guess Python 3.13 now,
which is a miniature JIT compiler.
Is that a right characterization?
I think that's not the compiler that's,
well, I suppose it will be smaller, but the--
- Maybe the parts it applies to,
the parts that get compiled.
- Yeah, so-- - It's more, I'm trying to say.
- I think the idea is that you want to compile
all of the code where it's sort of performance matters
that it's sort of hot code.
But it makes life easier
if you just compile little chunks of code
and sort of stitch them together afterwards,
because it's very easy to fall back into the interpreter
and for the interpreter to jump into sort of compiled code.
And you can sort of just hang these bits of compiled code
off by individual byte codes where they sort of start from.
Obviously that's not fantastic for performance
because you're having to fall back into interpreter
which limits your ability to infer things
about the state of things.
So obviously if you've said earlier,
specialization, you have to do a lot of type checks and other sort of checks.
If you've done a whole bunch of checks, if you then fall back into the interpreter, you
have to throw away all that information.
If you compile a bigger region of code, which is of the stage four, then you've already
know something about the code and you can sort of apply those compilations.
The problem with trying to do big regions up front is that if you choose poorly, you
can make performance worse.
This is a real issue for, well, existing ones.
I think we're gonna talk about some of the other
historical sort of compilers in the past,
and that this is a real issue for those,
that they're just trying to compile a method at a time,
regardless of whether that is a sensible unit to compile.
- Right, it's sometimes hard to do optimizations
when it's too small, right?
- Yeah, and also it's very expensive
to do regions that are too big,
or just in the bounded in the wrong places.
Okay, yeah, that definitely sounds tricky.
Guido, there was a question earlier about,
you know, mypyC work and the mypy stuff,
and you are really central to that, right?
Doing a lot of work there.
How do you, both of you, either of you,
feel about using type annotations
as some sort of guide to this compiler?
For example, Cython lets you say,
you know, X colon int as a parameter,
and it'll take that as meaning something
when you compile with Cython.
It seems like, you know, Mark is talking about
knowing the types and guessing them correctly matters
in terms of what's fast here.
Is there any thought or appetite
for using type annotations to mean more than
static analysis?
- Well, there, there,
there is the, I mean, it's a great idea.
And I think for smaller code bases, something like mypyC will prove to be viable.
Or for code bases where there is an incredible motivation to make this happen.
I could see that happen at Instagram, for example.
But in general, most people haven't annotated their code completely and correctly.
And so if you were to switch to using something like mypyC,
you'd find that basically it wouldn't work in a large number of cases.
and it would basically sort of it would it's a different language and it has different semantics
and it has sort of different rules and and so you have to write to that. I can see there's a
big challenge to say hey everybody we can do this great stuff if you type annotate it and only four
percent of people have properly annotated their code and then there's also the option the possibility
that it's incorrectly annotated, in which case it probably makes it worse in some way of a crash or
something. MyPriceC will generally crash if a type is detected that doesn't match the annotation.
Yeah, so and if you annotate stuff with simple types, you can get quite good speed up. So number
is generally designed for numerical stuff, but again it's the simple types, integers, floats,
Cython obviously will do this, Number does it dynamically, Cython statically, and the
Number model for example is similar to the model that Julia language uses. Essentially you compile
a method at a time, but you make as many specializations as you need for the particular
types and I can give very good performance for that sort of numerical code, but the problem is
that saying something is a particular type doesn't tell you very much about it. It doesn't tell you
what attributes an instance of it may or may not have. It depends, you know, because you can,
it's not like Java or C++ where having a particular class means it has those instance
attributes and they will exist or at least, you know, they'll be there exist in a particular
place and they can be checked very efficiently because they have dictionary lookup and so on.
These things get a bit fuzzy. So 72 bytes into this C object is where you find the name or
something like that, right? Yeah. So because we basically, because anything might not be
as the annotation say effectively at the virtual machine level, we have to check everything. And
And if we're going to check it anyway, we may as well just check it once up ahead
as we first do the compilation, whatever, specialization,
and then assume it's going to be like that.
Because if the annotations are correct, then that's just as efficient.
And if the annotations are wrong, we still get some performance benefit.
And it's robust as well.
So there's really no...
The only advantage of the annotations is for this sort of very loopy code
where we can do things like loop transformations and so on,
because we can infer the types from the arguments
of enough of the function to do that stuff.
And that works great for numerical stuff,
but for more general code is problematic.
What about slots?
Slots are an interesting, not frequently used aspect of Python types
that seem to change how things are laid out a little bit.
Yeah.
Does that--
- Well, mypyC actually, one of mypyC's main tricks
is that it turns every class into a class with slots.
- Okay.
- Which if you know how slots work,
you will immediately see the limitation
because it means there are no dynamic attributes at all.
- Yeah, but these are what you get for your fields
and that's it.
- Yeah, I mean, if you don't have dynamic attributes,
- Though it gives you pretty efficient memory use.
I mean, it's not so far off Java.
- And more predictability about what's there
and what's not, which is why it came to mind, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, I mean, they definitely have their use.
- Yep.
All right, Mark, that was your four-stage plan,
hoping to make 1.5 times as fast as before each time,
which if you do that over four releases,
you end up with five times faster, right?
That's the standard plan.
Where are we on this?
How's it going for you and everyone on the team?
- So I say it's a bit of a jumble of stages one and two
that we're implementing,
largely because it's a larger,
more diverse team than I was expecting.
So it makes sense to just sort of spread things.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Yeah, you'll work on operators,
you go work on zero overhead exception handling and-
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I would say from where we are now,
I was probably a bit optimistic with stage one,
but stage two seems to have a lot of potential still.
There's always little bits of the interpreter
we can tweak and improve.
So between the two of them,
I'm confident we'll get this projected
over twice the speed.
- That's fantastic.
So the course you're on right now,
if let's just say stage one and two happen,
and for some reason the JIT stuff doesn't,
that's still a big contribution.
What do you think in terms of speed up for that?
- Well, again, it's gonna depend.
- I know it matters so much, but like, you know.
- I mean, I just wanna, 'cause like,
currently we have a sort of set of benchmarks
that we're using.
I mean, not possibly the, I mean,
the more benchmarks is always better.
So it's a broad set, individually,
the benchmarks, some of them aren't great,
but collectively a foremost sort of useful data set.
But I mean, with speed ups from up like up to 60%
down to zero, so.
- Yeah.
- It's definitely a spread.
So it can, you know, try it out would be the thing.
I mean, you can download 3.11 alpha one
and alpha two should be out in a few days at all time now.
So presumably before this publish a podcast.
So people can download it and play with it.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
I, you know, thank you for this.
I think even 50, 60%, if it stay there,
That's pretty incredible.
I mean, Guido, this language has been around for 30 years.
People have been trying to optimize it for a long time.
It's incredible, right?
And then, you know, to do this sort of change now,
that would be really significant.
- Yeah, this is an area that we haven't spent much time on
previously for various reasons.
I mean, people have spent a lot of time
on sort of making the string of the objects fast,
making dictionary operations fast,
making the memory efficient,
adding functionality that the sort of Python has generally,
I think, had more of a focus on functionality
than on speed.
And so for me, this is also a change in mindset.
And I'm still learning a lot.
Mark actually teaches me a lot
about how to think about this stuff.
And I decided to buy this horrible book.
Well, it's a great book, "Computer Architecture,"
but it's also like, it weighs more than a 17-inch laptop.
- Wow.
- Classic text, but not a light read.
- Yeah, down into, beyond the software layer,
into the hardware bits.
- It makes me amazed that we have any performance at all
and that any performance is predictable
because we're doing everything wrong
from the perspective of giving the CPU
something to work with.
I mean, all the algorithms described in there,
branch prediction, speculative execution,
caching of instructions,
all that is aimed at small loops of numerical code.
And we have none of that.
- Yeah, exactly, exactly.
C of LC is not a numerical loop, definitely not.
All right, well, I think that might be it
for the time we have.
I got a couple of questions from the audience out there.
Toon Army Captain says,
"I'm interested in Guido's thoughts
"about the Microsoft funded effort
"versus the developer in residence,
"particularly in terms of the major work
"of the language in the CPython runtime going forward."
I think these are both good things,
both really good things.
They seem super different to me.
- I think it's great that we have a developer in residence.
It's a very different role than what we're doing here.
The team at Microsoft is, at least,
we're trying to be super focused on performance
to the exclusion of almost everything else,
except all those constraints I mentioned, of course.
The developer in residence is focused on
the community, other core developers, but also contributors.
Lukasz is great.
He's the perfect guy for that role.
And his work is completely orthogonal to what we're doing.
And I hope that somehow the PSF finds funds for keeping the developer in residence role
and maybe even expanding it for many years.
It seems to me like a really important role to smooth the edges of people contributing
to CPython.
And the difference of what Mark and you all are doing is, you know, heads down, focused
on writing one type of code, whereas Lukas is there to make it easier for everyone else
to do whatever they were going to do.
And I think one sort of a horizontal scale of the CPython team and the other is very
focused, which is also needed.
And it's actually amazing that we've been able to do all the work that we've been doing
over the past 30 years on Python without a developer in residence.
I think in the early years I was probably
taking up that role but the last decade or two there just have
been too many issues, too many peps for
for me to sort of get everything going and sort of having... I was
always working part-time on Python and part-time working on my day job.
Lukasz is working full-time on Python and he has a somewhat specific mandate
to help contributions go smoother,
make working with the issue tracker easier, and that
developers. Contributors must be encouraged and rewarded and currently often the way the
bugs.python.org experience is it's a very old web app and it looks that way
and it's difficult to learn how to do various things with that thing
and so Lukasz is really helping people. Yeah, it's fantastic. Of course there's also the
the somewhat separate project of switching
from bugspython.org to a purely GitHub based tracker.
- Yeah, I was just thinking of that
as you were speaking there.
Do you think that'll help?
I feel like people are more familiar with that workflow.
- People are more familiar.
It's more integrated with the pull request flow
that we already have on GitHub.
I think it will be great.
expectations is that I think it'll be actually happening before the end of this year or very early next year.
That'd be fantastic. The code's already there, the work's already there, might as well have the conversations and the issues and whatnot there.
Alright guys, I think we are definitely over time, but I really appreciate, first of all, the work that you're doing,
Mark on this project, and Guido on the last 30 years.
This is amazing.
You can see out in the comments how appreciative folks
are of all the work you've done.
So thank you for that.
Let's close with a final call to action.
You have the small team working on it.
I'm sure the community can help in some way.
What do you want from people?
How can they help you, either now or in the future?
Well, I mean, it's just contributed to CPython.
So I mean, I don't think it's specifically performance.
I mean, like all the contributions help improve,
you know, co-quality and reliability
are still very important.
So I don't think particularly people,
anything particularly can do,
but we do have a sort of ideas repo
if people do have sort of things they wanna suggest
or bounce ideas around or whatever.
Maybe they could test their workloads on alpha versions
of things that have-- - Yeah, I mean,
that would be fantastic.
We don't really have a setup for where people
can put that information, but if just open an issue
on the ideas thing and post some data, it'd be fantastic.
- We'd love it for people to sort of try to use
the new code and see how it works out for them.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, thank you both for being here.
It's been great.
- Our pleasure.
- Yeah, thank you.
- Yeah.
Thanks.
[BLANK_AUDIO]